Title: Digital Humanities Summer School, Oxford 2011
Date: 2011-08-01 04:44
Author: chris
Category: Uncategorized
Slug: digital-humanities-summer-school-oxford-day-1

I'd hoped to digest the summer school in a blog-as-you-go manner, but
each day was packed full of so much fantastic DH fare that I quickly
gave up on that plan.  But here's my somewhat more considered review of
the first day, looking at most of the sessions I attended but
particularly the ones that are relevant to work I've been doing.

I went to four sessions on Monday:

(1) Creating digital texts using the TEI (part 1)

The first session was something of a gallop through some TEI basics,
with Sebastian covering the initial material on what a TEI document
looks like, how to achieve well-formedness and validation, before moving
quickly on to more complex topics.

After what seemed like a fairly brief practical session to familiarise
ourselves with oXygen and some markup basics, we returned to hear
James's talk on schema customisation using Roma.  He alternated between
a walkthrough of Roma and explaining the ODD (One Document Does it All)
XML that actually defines the custom schema.  I haven't used ODD much
and would actually like to work on building a schema at the nuts and
bolts level, though I expect using Roma to get started would be the most
effective way to learn.

(2) "...and now what?": Some approaches to project modelling

This presentation was delivered by Pip Willcox of the Bodleian Library,
and looked at some general principles of digital project management as
well as some fascinating details of some of the major projects she has
worked on.  The Shakespeare Quartos Archive was particularly interesting
because it involved international collaboration by (I think) six major
libraries and its fairly ambitious goals were achieved within a year.

Her main advice for DH projects was around communication and clear
documentation of each project, and with the kind of funding and
collaborative model that is the norm in DH, this was a very relevant
message.

(3) RDF Modelling and Conversion

This session was somewhat outside of my experience, having only a vague
idea of what RDF does and never having used it.  Hmm.  Must look into
this some more.

(4) Plenary: Providing documents on the web: experience from
legislation.gov.uk

Jeni Tennison is a well known XML & XSLT expert, and she has clearly
tackled a major project as the architect of legislation.gov.uk.  The
website provides highly detailed, versioned records of UK legislation,
so provides not only the original form of any given piece of
legislation, it's current form, but also every step in between.  Their
data comes in a variety of forms and can involve difficult substitutions
where changes cross or overlap document structures, or where changes are
made to a law that apply differently in England and Scotland.

Of interest to me is that they're using a native XML database to handle
the data (I don't think she mentioned which one).  This has proved more
flexible than a SQL database and is easily extensible.

They have also worked on user and re-user experience a lot, and are
moving to a participation phase where they get some major users to
contribute to the updating of the website.  There is an increasing
backlog of updates to the website, so they Since this is an open
project, those who would otherwise pay private legal services firms for
this information are motivated to help make it work.
