Title: Digitising a Bibliography of Writing by Māori in English
Date: 2012-03-28 02:33
Author: chris
Category: Uncategorized
Slug: digitising-a-bibliography-of-writing-by-maori-in-english

Today I'm presenting a poster at *Digital Humanities Australasia 2012:
Building, Mapping, Connecting* at ANU.  It describes a project I'm
currently working on in my spare time, the digitisation of Bridget
Underhill's 1998 *Bibliography of Writing by Māori in English with
partial annotation*.  The poster covers the workflow for creating and
managing the digital resource plus an introduction of sorts to the
question of why it is important to make it available to a wider audience
than currently use it in its static / print form.  I'm publishing the
introduction below, and the whole poster can be viewed here: [Digitising
a Bibliography of Writing by Māori in English] [1]

I'd like to thank Dr Bridget Underhill for agreeing to develop the
project with me, [Joe Wicentowski](https://twitter.com/joewiz) for his help with web development using eXist, and the [Australasian Association for Digital Humanities](http://aa-dh.org) for providing me with a travel bursary to present my work at DHA2012 - see what's happening on Twitter by following #dha2012

 

---------------------------------------------

Introduction
------------

The attempt to produce a bibliography of all writing by Māori in the
English language over a period of more than a hundred years is an
incredibly ambitious task.  Bridget Underhill’s 1998 doctoral thesis
achieves nothing less, seeking

>    to collect and annotate writing by Māori in English from the
>    earliest documents to the time of compilation, which terminated in
>    September 1998. It includes Māori writers in English, Māori
>    translators of Māori texts, largely occurring in the period before
>    1870, and Māori writers transcribing, translating or in the
>    original. Texts represented include fiction, prose, drama,
>    nonfiction, medical reports, geographical accounts and oral
>    accounts. The bibliography attempts to represent writing from all
>    iwi of Aotearoa [1].

While Underhill acknowledges the scale of the project and the challenges
it posed, she situates it broadly within a task of comparable
complexity: that of anthologists, historians and literary critics of the
1980s and 1990s who have sought to address the historical invisibility
of Māori writing in English. Witi Ihimaera, for instance, is well known
as the ‘first’ Māori novelist and one whose work is marked by
significant revision following the development of Māori radical politics
in the 1970s. His edited anthology _Into the World of Light_ (1982)
attempted to address this invisibility but ten years later, around the
time Underhill began her project, he still acknowledged that “although
individual writers are known, writing by Māori still remains ‘hidden’ in
this country, either unknown or unpublished”[2].  Whether Māori writing
should more visible and by what means this should happen is still an
essential question for New Zealand’s literary and political culture.

Underhill’s bibliography includes entries for about 1300 Māori writers,
the majority of whom are not widely published or recognised in a
canonical sense, just as one would expect for a list of this size. There
are clearly many benefits to digitizing such a bibliography, not least
that it will make Underhill’s work using offline tools – writing
letters, making telephone calls – much more readily available to
researchers.  A digital bibliography can be updated; it can be corrected
and maintained effectively; and in its online form it can help introduce
hitherto little-known Māori writers to a wider readership.  As a means
of organising and presenting data about a literary culture, it could
make available a more complete picture of patterns in Māori writing and
publishing in English than has previously been possible.  Digital
researchers may bring the lens of what Franco Moretti calls ‘distant
reading’ to bear on these patterns, or enlist visualisation techniques
to present them.  The practical considerations obvious to digital
humanists are, therefore, broadly aligned with the project of making
Māori writing visible that has been underway for perhaps 30 years now. 
However, Underhill is quick to acknowledge the complexity of this
endeavor within New Zealand’s postcolonial context, and the importance
of Māori ownership of this process.

Scholars have recognised the bibliography as a storehouse of evidence
that helps us examine the cultural history of Māori writing in English
from other points of view.  Patrick Evans, for instance, describes an
ideology of biculturalism in New Zealand, an assertion of cultural
parity between Māori and Pakeha evident in the iconography and literary
narratives of the mid-twentieth century, that has tended to produce
either an aestheticised, politically naïve art in the vein of Ihimaera’s
early work, or a more radical form of writing that is in large part
deliberately or strategically invisible to Pakeha culture.  As a close
reader, Evans points to the effects of this dominant ideology in the
Māori Affairs department publication *Te Ao Hou* (1952-75) and in the
early works and later revisionism of Ihimaera, but he suggests that it
can be evidenced more thoroughly and perhaps more subtly by an
examination of narrative patterns in the many little-known works found
in Underhill’s bibliography.

Turning to the many ‘unknown’ writers Underhill has documented, Evans
suggests, offers up figures such as Rowley Habib, who are invisible to
the degree that they  “[resist] the lure of the bicultural and its
inducements to write in the tropes which the dominant culture prescribes
for ‘Maori writing’”[3].  While there are more widely published Māori
authors working in a resistant mode, independent of “Pakeha-style
biculturalism”, the task of reading these subversive or alternative
threads relies on continuously updating what we know of both the
literary tradition and its offshoots and anti-traditions. Evans points
to the case of Alistair Campbell, a writer who “has had nowhere
comfortable to ‘fit’ in existing narratives of New Zealand
literature”[4] and who was in fact excluded from Underhill’s
bibliography; yet, by other more critically post-colonialist accounts of
Māori literary history, writing such as Campbell’s is very useful when
reading Māori writing against the grain of Pakeha versions of
biculturalism.

In this context, a digital bibliography of Māori writing in English is
an opportunity to re-emphasise the value of heterogeneity in our
accounts of New Zealand’s literary history.  Although begun within an
academic institution and the print medium, an online version of this
valuable bibliography may enable new conversations about the history and
future of Māori writing through its exposure to the digital crowd. 
Rather than speculate on the form such conversations may take, perhaps
the most ‘DH’ aspect of the project is simply my wish to help make
Underhill’s data more widely available and see what people will do with
it.

---

[1]:  Underhill, Bridget. *A Bibliography of Writing by Māori in English with partial annotation*. PhD thesis, University of Canterbury, 1998.

[2]: Ihimaera, Witi. Qtd in Underhill xi.

[3]:  Evans, Patrick. “‘Pakeha-Style Biculturalism’ and the Maori Writer.” *Journal of New Zealand Literature* 24 (2006):17.

[4]:  Ibid. 27.
